Created tutorial for MultiGSEA (#5567)
galaxyproject/training-material: topics/proteomics/tutorials/multiGSEA-tutorial/tutorial.md

---
layout: tutorial_hands_on

> title: Using MultiGSEA

Reviewer: the title can perhaps be a bit more informative. Maybe something like "Pahtway enrichment using MultiGSEA" (or similar, just something a bit more about the scientific goal of this tutorial)

This tutorial covers a simple example workflow illustrating how the multiGSEA package works. The omics data sets that will be used throughout the example were originally provided by Quiros et al. (Quirós et al. 2017). In their publication the authors analyzed the mitochondrial response to four different toxicants, including Actinonin, Diclofenac, FCCB, and Mito-Block (MB), within the transcriptome, proteome, and metabolome layer.
In this tutorial we will solely focus on the Actinonin data set.

> <agenda-title></agenda-title>
>
> In this tutorial, we will cover:
>
> 1. TOC
> {:toc}
>
{: .agenda}

# Preparing the Data

> To perform pathway enrichment with MultiGSEA, you'll need omics datasets in the file type TSV . Each individual data set contains four columns representing the feature (denoted as Symbol), the log2 fold change (logFC), the p-value (pValue), and the adjusted p-values (adj.pValue). We'll use example data provided on Zenodo.

Reviewer: you have provided the technical description of the dataset, is there also a biological description that can be given? what samples are in these files? what was the research question that led to this data, etc?

Reviewer: ok, I see now that you did that already a bit in the text above, so please disregard my comment

>## Selecting parameters
><hands-on-title> Task description </hands-on-title>
>
> 1. Select the tool {% tool [multiGSEA](toolshed.g2.bx.psu.edu/repos/iuc/multigsea/multigsea/1.12.0+galaxy0) %} in Galaxy.
> 2. Configure the input parameters as follows:
>    - *"Select transcriptomics data"*: `Enabled`
>        - {% icon param-file %} *"Transcriptomics data"*: `Transcriptomics`
>    - *"Select proteomics data"*: `Enabled`
>        - {% icon param-file %} *"Proteomics data"*: `Proteomics`
>    - *"Select metabolomics data"*: `Enabled`
>        - {% icon param-file %} *"Metabolomics data"*: `Metabolomics`
> 3. You can also choose the Gene ID format for every data set. In this tutorial we will use the preset "SYMBOL" for transcriptomics and proteomics. For metabolomics we use HMDB.
> 4. Select in **Supported organisms** the organism of which the data is about. In our case we select `Homo sapiens (Human)`.
> 5. **Pathway databases**: Databases often contain their own format in which pathway definitions are provided. So you can select a relevant database. For the tutorial we choose `KEGG`

> > 6. **Combine p-values method**: Choose a method (here `Stouffer` for balanced weighting). To more comprehensively measure a pathway response, multiGSEA provides different approaches to compute an aggregated p value over multiple omics layers. Because no single approach for aggregating p values performs best under all circumstances, Loughin proposed basic recommendations on which method to use depending on structure and expectation of the problem. If small p values should be emphasized, Fisher’s method should be chosen. In cases where p values should be treated equally, Stouffer’s method is preferable. If large p values should be emphasized, the user should select Edgington’s method. Figure 2 indicates the difference between those three methods.

Reviewer: I reformatted the hands-on boxes a bit. The hands-on boxes should be very concise, just telling the user how to configure the tool. I have moved all your (very useful!) explanations to a tip box inside the hands-on box, but you could also just put them in normal text before or after the hands-on box, as you prefer

  ![P-Value](../../images/p-value.png "P-value methods")
> 7. **P-value correction method** Type I and type II errors depend on each other and thus reducing type I errors through a p value adjustment will likely increase the chance of making a type II error and an appropriate trade-off has to be made. Choose one of the different methods for controlling false discovery rate: For the tutorial choose `BH` (Benjamini-Hochberg).
> 8. Click on `Run Tool`
>
{: .hands_on}

> 

Reviewer: would it be useful to discuss the output of the tool here? again both on technical level (what is the format, what do the contents mean?) and biological (what can we learn from the output)

---
layout: tutorial_hands_on

title: Using MultiGSEA
subtopic: multi-omics
tags:
  - multi-omics
  - transcriptomics
  - proteomics
  - metabolomics
zenodo_link: 'https://zenodo.org/records/14216972'
questions:
- How to use MultiGSEA for GSEA-based pathway enrichment for multiple omics layers?
objectives:
- Perform GSEA-based pathway enrichment for transcriptomics, proteomics, and metabolomics data.
- Understand how to combine p-values across multiple omics layers.
time_estimation: 1H
key_points:
- MultiGSEA provides an integrated workflow for pathway enrichment analysis across multi-omics data.
- Supports pathway definitions from several databases and robust ID mapping.

> contributors:
> - tStehling

Reviewer: Our new style for contributor metadata is: 

```suggestion
contributions:
  authorship:
    - tStehling
```

This tutorial covers a simple example workflow illustrating how the multiGSEA package works. The omics data sets that will be used throughout the example were originally provided by Quiros et al. (Quirós et al. 2017). In their publication the authors analyzed the mitochondrial response to four different toxicants, including Actinonin, Diclofenac, FCCB, and Mito-Block (MB), within the transcriptome, proteome, and metabolome layer.
In this tutorial we will solely focus on the Actinonin data set.

> <agenda-title></agenda-title>
>
> In this tutorial, we will cover:
>
> 1. TOC
> {:toc}
>
{: .agenda}

# Preparing the Data

> To perform pathway enrichment with MultiGSEA, you'll need omics datasets in the file type TSV . Each individual data set contains four columns representing the feature (denoted as Symbol), the log2 fold change (logFC), the p-value (pValue), and the adjusted p-values (adj.pValue). We'll use example data provided on Zenodo.

Reviewer 2: Maybe Sebastian can tell us a few xrefs which methods can give the needed values for Transcriptomics, Metabolomics, and Proteomics.

>
> 1. Run {% tool [multiGSEA](toolshed.g2.bx.psu.edu/repos/iuc/multigsea/multigsea/1.12.0+galaxy0) %} with the following parameters
>    - *"Select transcriptomics data"*: `Enabled`
>        - {% icon param-file %} *"Transcriptomics data"*: `Transcriptomics`
>        - {% icon param-select %} *"Gene ID format in transcriptomics data"*: `SYMBOL`
>    - *"Select proteomics data"*: `Enabled`
>        - {% icon param-file %} *"Proteomics data"*: `Proteomics`
>        - {% icon param-select %} *"Gene ID format in proteomics data"*: `SYMBOL`
>    - *"Select metabolomics data"*: `Enabled`
>        - {% icon param-file %} *"Metabolomics data"*: `Metabolomics`
>        - {% icon param-select %} *"Metabolite ID format"*: `HMDB`
>    - *"Supported organisms"*: `Homo sapiens (Human)`.
>    - *"Pathway databases"*: `KEGG`
>    - *"Combine p-values method"*: `Stouffer`
>    - *"P-value correction method"*: `BH`
>
>    > <tip-title>About the parameters</tip-title>
>    > - **Pathway databases**: `KEGG`Databases often contain their own format in which pathway definitions are provided. So you can select a relevant >    >   database. For the tutorial we choose `KEGG`

> >    > - **Combine p-values method**: Choose a method (here `Stouffer` for balanced weighting). To more comprehensively measure a pathway response, multiGSEA provides different approaches to compute an aggregated p value over multiple omics layers. Because no single approach for aggregating p values performs best under all circumstances, Loughin proposed basic recommendations on which method to use depending on structure and expectation of the problem. If small p values should be emphasized, Fisher’s method should be chosen. In cases where p values should be treated equally, Stouffer’s method is preferable. If large p values should be emphasized, the user should select Edgington’s method. Figure 2 indicates the difference between those three methods.

Reviewer 2: We need a reference for Loughin?

>    >   ![P-Value](../../images/p-value.png "P-value methods")
>    > - **P-value correction method** Type I and type II errors depend on each other and thus reducing type I errors through a p value adjustment will likely increase the chance of making a type II error and an appropriate trade-off has to be made. Choose one of the different methods for controlling false discovery rate: For the tutorial choose `BH` (Benjamini-Hochberg).
>    {: .tip}
>
{: .hands_on}

# Mitochondrial stress activates metabolic pathways of amino acid biosynthesis.

> >Mitochondrial stress triggers the activation of amino acid biosynthesis and related metabolic pathways, as highlighted by Quiros et al. (Ref findest du in der Vignette), who identified up-regulation of several amino acid related pathways.

Reviewer 2: Quiros et al. needs to be added as a citation.

Reviewer 2: https://training.galaxyproject.org/training-material/topics/contributing/tutorials/create-new-tutorial-content/tutorial.html#citations

Reviewer 2: Quirós, P M, M A Prado, N Zamboni, D D’Amico, R W Williams, D Finley, S P Gygi, and J Auwerx. 2017. “Multi-Omics Analysis Identifies ATF4 as a Key Regulator of the Mitochondrial Stress Response in Mammals.” J Cell Biol 216 (7): 2027–45. https://doi.org/10.1083/jcb.201702058.

Reviewer 2: ```
@article{LOUGHIN2004467,
title = {A systematic comparison of methods for combining p-values from independent tests},
journal = {Computational Statistics & Data Analysis},
volume = {47},
number = {3},
pages = {467-485},
year = {2004},
issn = {0167-9473},
doi = {https://doi.org/10.1016/j.csda.2003.11.020},
url = {https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0167947303002950},
author = {Thomas M. Loughin}
}
```

>These findings align with our results using a multi-omics approach with multiGSEA
>Our results also reveal the enrichment of amino acid-related pathways, e.g.:
>
>```
>

> >cut -f 1,9 output.tsv |grep amino -i

Reviewer 2: This needs to be translated in a Galaxy tool run :)

This tutorial covers a simple example workflow illustrating how the multiGSEA package works. The omics data sets that will be used throughout the example were originally provided by Quiros et al. (Quirós et al. 2017). In their publication the authors analyzed the mitochondrial response to four different toxicants, including Actinonin, Diclofenac, FCCB, and Mito-Block (MB), within the transcriptome, proteome, and metabolome layer.
In this tutorial we will solely focus on the Actinonin data set.

> For more background information you can read following articles: 
> - Multiomics analysis by Quiros {% cite quiros2017multi %}
> - Methods for combining p-values by Loughin {% cite LOUGHIN2004467 %}

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

>
> 1. Run {% tool [multiGSEA](toolshed.g2.bx.psu.edu/repos/iuc/multigsea/multigsea/1.12.0+galaxy0) %} with the following parameters
>    - *"Select transcriptomics data"*: `Enabled`
>        - {% icon param-file %} *"Transcriptomics data"*: `Transcriptomics`
>        - {% icon param-select %} *"Gene ID format in transcriptomics data"*: `SYMBOL`
>    - *"Select proteomics data"*: `Enabled`
>        - {% icon param-file %} *"Proteomics data"*: `Proteomics`
>        - {% icon param-select %} *"Gene ID format in proteomics data"*: `SYMBOL`
>    - *"Select metabolomics data"*: `Enabled`
>        - {% icon param-file %} *"Metabolomics data"*: `Metabolomics`
>        - {% icon param-select %} *"Metabolite ID format"*: `HMDB`
>    - *"Supported organisms"*: `Homo sapiens (Human)`.
>    - *"Pathway databases"*: `Kegg`, `Reactome`
>    - *"Combine p-values method"*: `Stouffer`
>    - *"P-value correction method"*: `BH`
>
>    > <tip-title>About the parameters</tip-title>
>    > - **Pathway databases**: Databases often contain their own format in which pathway definitions are provided. So you can select a relevant database. For the tutorial we choose the preset "Kegg" and "Reactome".

> >    > - **Combine p-values method**: Choose a method (here `Stouffer` for balanced weighting). To more comprehensively measure a pathway response, multiGSEA provides different approaches to compute an aggregated p value over multiple omics layers. Because no single approach for aggregating p values performs best under all circumstances, Loughin proposed basic recommendations on which method to use depending on structure and expectation of the problem. If small p values should be emphasized, Fisher’s method should be chosen. In cases where p values should be treated equally, Stouffer’s method is preferable. If large p values should be emphasized, the user should select Edgington’s method. Figure 2 indicates the difference between those three methods.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
>    > - **Combine p-values method**: Choose a method (here `Stouffer` for balanced weighting). To more comprehensively measure a pathway response, multiGSEA provides different approaches to compute an aggregated p value over multiple omics layers. Because no single approach for aggregating p values performs best under all circumstances, {% cite LOUGHIN2004467 %} proposed basic recommendations on which method to use depending on structure and expectation of the problem. If small p values should be emphasized, Fisher’s method should be chosen. In cases where p values should be treated equally, Stouffer’s method is preferable. If large p values should be emphasized, the user should select Edgington’s method. Figure 2 indicates the difference between those three methods.
```

> This tutorial covers a simple example workflow illustrating how the multiGSEA package works. The omics data sets that will be used throughout the example were originally provided by Quiros et al. (Quirós et al. 2017). In their publication the authors analyzed the mitochondrial response to four different toxicants, including Actinonin, Diclofenac, FCCB, and Mito-Block (MB), within the transcriptome, proteome, and metabolome layer.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This tutorial covers a simple example workflow illustrating how the multiGSEA package works. The omics data sets that will be used throughout the example were originally provided by {% cite quiros2017multi %}. In their publication the authors analyzed the mitochondrial response to four different toxicants, including Actinonin, Diclofenac, FCCB, and Mito-Block (MB), within the transcriptome, proteome, and metabolome layer.
```
